# 2016-07-13

about the #Faoistetrip modularization engine.

I have no idea why it's a _modularization_ engine, but I guess if we'd been calling it that way (30 minutes) we should keep calling it that way.

tl;dr: skip to "why need a 'modularization' engine?"

While writing this document, I realized that mutations will not occur during processes that deal with genetic information inside an organism lacking certain resources / enzymes. We might want to consider this as a limiting factor of mutations or achieving new genes / alleles in our game.

While writing that sentence above, I realized that such situations are only limited to a few individuals in a population, which means it's probably too insignificant and not worth considering given the context of our game, where the smallest level of organization is, surprisingly, populations.

While writing that sentence above, I realized that if such situations are caused by lacking particular genes or alleles, then it should be significant enough to consider in our game, because such genetic condition should affect an entire population which had shared a mostly equal set of genes and alleles.

While writing that sentence above, I realized that I should be more articulate.

## why need a _"modularization"_ engine?

Imagine if this [game](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simulation) became so popular that we were actually driven to introduce more genes and alleles.

Sometimes we can get stupid enough to design a overpowered / meaningless gene. An example of an overpowered gene is a metaphysical gene K50 that kills _exactly_ 50% of the population. If the chances of getting K50 in a species' genome were as likely as they were with other, more "regular" genes, the game would be messed up. This is a problem with game balance.

We should fix such a problem by making adjustments, which include:

* making the effect more / less significant;
* making it more / less likely to get the gene / allele; and
* others.

However, it would be hard to adjust in a game where there may potentially be thousands of and even more genes and alleles.

Thus it would be great if we can write a modularization engine that figures out what adjustments to make. Our game development process would then be:

1. come up with new genes and alleles
1. provisionally set the effects of the genes / alleles, the probability of getting them, and other information about them
1. start the engine
1. adjust as the engine tells us how to

## how do we write such an engine?

I am thinking of using a genetic algorithm.

## what is a genetic algorithm?

Let me crudely explain what a genetic algorithm is by using one to solve a problem.

Our problem is: "give two small positive integers that add up to a big number."

The __solution__ to this problem will take the form of two integers. We will denote the solution by `[m][n]` where `m` and `n` are two small positive integers.

The algorithm begins by coming up with a decent number of potential solutions, each of which we call an __individual__. Hence each individual has the form `[p][q]` where `p` and `q` are two small integers.

While we know there are two small positive integers `p` and `q` associated with every individual, the actual values of `p` and `q` can vary. This is exactly like genetics, where we know that there are the same __genes__ in the genome of every individual of the same species, the __alleles__ each individual takes can vary. We thus compare `p` and `q` to genes, and the actual value for them in an individual to alleles.

We construct every individual by choosing a random value for the allele of each gene within a range of possible alleles. This range must be defined by the problem. Our problem specified the positive integers to be "small" - how small? Let's say we call less than 4 small. Now the range of alleles for both the first gene `p` and the second gene `q` are defined by `{ 0, 1, 2, 3 }`. We construct 3 individuals, namely, `A` with `[2,0]`, `B` with `[1,3]` and `C` with `[0,1]`.

In biology, natural selection favors the genes / alleles that produce the best adaptations to the environment. Put simply, genes / alleles that make an individual fitter are more likely to remain. In order to determine which alleles to keep, we assess how fit every individual is. The way of assessing an individual must be defined by the problem. Our problem says the integers must add up to a "big number". So, the larger the sum of the two integers, the more fit the individual.

By arithmetic, `B` is fitter than `A`, who is fitter than `C`.

Now, we "cross" the genes between individuals to produce offspring. Again, the fitter the individual, the more likely the gene remains, so we cross between the fitter individuals more often than we do between less fit individuals. We might want to cross between `A` and `B` 10 times, between `B` and `C` 5 times, and `A` and `C` 2 times.

We now have 10 + 5 + 2 + original 3 = 20 individuals. We then assess these individuals, rank by fitness, and cross them over... in a cyclic fashion.

After we have run a decent number of cycles, we take the individual at the top of the fitness ranking. This individual should be a decent solution. In the case of our problem, the resulting individual should be `[3,3]`.

## cool, what are the problems if we use a genetic algorithm to write the game balance finding engine?

If we were to use a genetic algorithm in our engine, the problem would be: "how do we set the effect and probability (and other information) for each gene and allele so that the game is balanced?"

The definition of an individual would be more complex. It might look like:

    Gene "Reproduction":
        Allele "Normal":
            Makes the population grow by [#1] every simulation.

        Allele "Plus":
            Makes the population grow by [#2] every simulation.
            A species with the "Normal" allele has a [#3] probability per simulation of getting this allele.

        Allele "PlusPlus":
            Makes the population grow by [#4] every simulation.
            A species with the "Normal" allele has a [#5] probability per simulation of getting this allele.
            A species with the "Plus" allele has a [#6] probability per simulation of getting this allele.

    ...

This is the case with just one gene, and we already have 6 numbers to fill in.

The ranges for each of these numbers are also huge. While numbers representing probability like `#3`, `#5` and `#6` have a limited range of just 100 integers from 1 to 100, numbers representing decimals with high precisions have much larger ranges.

Assessing the fitness of each individual would be difficult. How does one define game balance? Fewer populations dying out in every 10,000 simulations? Change in population sizes remain within a narrow range in every 10,000 simulations? Good user review? Remember that the assessment must be quantitative and numerical so that we can rank individuals by fitness.

It also takes time for us to run the simulation, although this is not a big problem.

## the ultimate problem

Why even write an engine that resolves game balance? The player is supposed to find game balance within his own set of populations. Surely we should run a few simulations before introducing every gene and allele, we don't need to focus too much on achieving ultimate game balance on our side.
